JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a
dangerous search
for answers among the blackened
ruins of a
warehouse fire in Oakland,
California, where
at least 36 people died, and
digging for more
remains goes on.
Then: President-elect Donald
Trump's team
expands, as Dr. Ben Carson is
tapped for housing
secretary.
Our Politics Monday team on the
latest in
the transition, plus questions
about the Trump
approach to China.
And we sit down with former
British Prime
Minister Tony Blair to ask why
he's pushing
a movement in the political
center.
TONY BLAIR, Former British Prime
Minister:
It's really about linking up
people who look
at what is happening in the
world, know that
the world needs change, and not
the status
quo, don't want the center to be
a place where
we're just managing the status
quo, but instead
where we're really articulating
change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And:
FRED BIDWELL, Art Collector:
This is more
art than the human mind could
possibly perceive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Art Basel
wraps up in Miami,
Jeffrey Brown offers a look
inside the nation's
largest art fair.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The death toll
keeps rising
in that warehouse fire in
Oakland, California,
to at least 36.
The building erupted into flames
Friday night
during a dance party.
Search efforts resumed today
amid charred
debris, after workers were given
time to shore
up one of the weakened walls.
JOHNNA WATSON, Oakland Police
Spokeswoman:
The search resumed approximately
9:00 a.m.
this morning, yes.
So work does continue inside the
building.
They continue to be very
careful, very tedious,
very mindful.
This scene is being managed with
a lot of
care and a lot of thought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Oakland fire
is now the
deadliest building fire in the
U.S. in more
than 10 years.
We will take a closer look at
how the community
is coping with the disaster
right after the
news summary.
Team Trump has added another
Cabinet nominee.
Dr. Ben Carson has been selected
as the choice
to oversee the Department of
Housing and Urban
Development.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage of today's
transition news.
LISA DESJARDINS: Early in the
GOP primaries,
Ben Carson was Donald Trump's
closest competition.
Now he's the pick as housing
chief.
The two became allies after
Carson left the
race, and, in September, with
Carson showed
the nominee the Detroit home
where he was
raised by a single mom.
Last month, Carson said that
background would
inform his work, should he
become housing
and urban development secretary:
DR.
BEN CARSON, Housing and Urban
Development
Secretary Nominee: Well, I know
that I grew
up in the inner city and have
spent a lot
of time there, and have dealt
with a lot of
patients from that area, and
recognize that
we cannot have a strong nation
if we have
weak inner cities.
LISA DESJARDINS: Carson, of
course, is known
as a former neurosurgeon.
He has no government experience,
but has commented
on housing policy before,
including criticism
of an Obama era requirement that
cities report
racial bias in public housing.
And he's slammed public
assistance programs
in general.
DR.
BEN CARSON: I'm really
interested in getting
rid of dependency, and I want us
to find a
way to allow people to excel in
our society.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Today,
president-elect Trump
called Carson "a brilliant mind
passionate
about strengthening
communities."
But the Democratic minority
leader in the
House, Nancy Pelosi, called him
a "disconcerting
and disturbingly unqualified
choice."
Also today, a surprise face at
Trump Tower,
former Vice President Al Gore.
He was scheduled to discuss
climate change
with Ivanka Trump, but her newly
elected father
joined in.
AL GORE, Former Vice President
of the United
States: The bulk of the time was
with president-elect
Donald Trump.
I found it an extremely
interesting conversation,
and to be continued.
LISA DESJARDINS: Contrast that
with tomorrow,
when the president-elect Trump
is scheduled
to meet with Rex Tillerson.
The CEO of ExxonMobil has been a
target of
climate change activists.
He's now being mentioned as
possible contender
for secretary of state.
In the meantime, some changes
for the president-elect's
family.
CNN reports that Ivanka Trump
and her husband,
Jared Kushner, both part of the
transition
team, are planning to move from
New York to
D.C.
Also in New York today, the
Green Party's
Jill Stein, speaking in favor of
recounts
in key states like Michigan,
where a judge
overnight ordered a recount to
start today.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There was also
more fallout
from the president-elect's phone
call with
the president of Taiwan.
The White House today reaffirmed
U.S. support
for the one-China policy that
says Taiwan
is part of China.
In the day's other news: A South
Carolina
judge declared a mistrial in a
dramatic police
killing after the jury
deadlocked.
North Charleston Officer Michael
Slager was
charged with murdering an
unarmed black man.
Walter Scott was shot as he ran
from a traffic
stop in an incident captured on
cell phone
video.
His brother today urged calm
ANTHONY SCOTT, Brother of Walter
Scott: We
are not going to tear up this
city.
We are going to -- we are going
to keep it
just the way it is.
And we are going to believe in
peaceful protest,
because it didn't turn out the
way we feel,
but we feel like our voices need
to be heard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Prosecutors said
they will
try Slager again.
He also faces federal civil
rights charges.
In Italy, Prime Minister Matteo
Renzi handed
in his resignation today, the
latest victim
of a populist wave across
Europe.
Renzi met with the country's
president a day
after voters soundly rejected
constitutional
reforms.
Earlier, he said has no regrets.
MATTEO RENZI, Italian Prime
Minister (through
translator): We are convincing.
I am sorry.
But we are leaving without
remorse.
As I said clearly from the
beginning, if no
wins, my experience of
government ends here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sunday's outcome
boosted anti-establishment
and anti-immigrant parties in
Italy.
Meanwhile, moderate leaders
across Europe
welcomed the outcome of
Austria's presidential
vote.
A left-leaning candidate,
Alexander van der
Bellen, won Sunday's election
there.
He had campaigned heavily to
maintain stronger
ties with Europe.
His far-right opponent talked of
leaving the
European Union and barring
migrants.
Russia and China today vetoed a
U.N. Security
Council resolution calling for a
seven-day
truce in the Syrian city of
Aleppo.
Eleven nations supported the
measure.
The U.S. deputy ambassador to
U.N. spoke after
the vote.
MICHELE SISON, U.S. Deputy
Ambassador to the
United Nations: We had a chance
not to end,
but to briefly stop the ongoing
butchery in
Eastern Aleppo.
We have failed because of a
cynical act.
With a wave of their hands,
Russia, China
and Venezuela showed that they
don't want
the suffering of Eastern Aleppo
to end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, fierce
fighting
continues in Aleppo, with
government forces
closing in on rebel sections.
The war in Syria is driving a
record United
Nations appeal for humanitarian
aid.
The world body asked today for
more than $22
billion for 2017.
Roughly a third of that would go
to help displaced
people inside Syria and those
who've fled
to other lands.
Back in this country, North
Carolina's Republican
Governor Pat McCrory conceded
defeat in his
reelection bid, after a month of
counting
absentee and provisional
ballots.
Democratic State Attorney
General Roy Cooper
won by just over 10,000 votes
out of 4.7 million
cast.
And on Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones industrial
average gained nearly 46 points
to close at
19216.
The Nasdaq rose 53 points, and
the S&P 500
added 12.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
voices from
Oakland on the warehouse fire;
Tony Blair's
efforts to encourage centrist
politics around
the world; global implications
as the Trump
team breaks from tradition; and
much more.
Back to the Oakland warehouse
fire.
Prosecutors moments ago said
murder charges
are possible in the case, but
didn't indicate
who could be charged.
As rescue workers continue the
painstaking
task of recovering bodies and
investigating
past concerns about the
warehouse that was
consumed by fire, members of the
city's artistic
community are grieving and
searching for a
way forward.
Special correspondent Joanne
Jennings reports
from California.
JOANNE JENNINGS:
Twenty-four-year-old Seung
Lee had never been to an art
warehouse party
before.
So, when the freelance writer
arrived at Ghost
Ship around 11:00 p.m. on Friday
night, he
was immediately drawn into the
scene.
SEUNG LEE, Freelance Journalist:
It was all
antique furnitures and lumber.
And it was almost like being in
the forest.
There were corridors on the
first floor where
you could kind of sneak into
little hideaways
where people could lounge in
chairs.
I thought this would be a good
place to hang
out on a Friday night.
JOANNE JENNINGS: Since there was
no bar at
the venue, Lee and his friends
decided to
make a run to a nearby liquor
store.
SEUNG LEE: It could not have
taken more than
seven minutes to go down and
come back.
And through the front window, I
just saw thick
black smoke just coming out, and
on the side,
I saw a huge flame on the back
of the second
floor.
And that was the fire.
JOANNE JENNINGS: Lee and his six
friends all
survived.
SEUNG LEE: I just think, what
did I do to
deserve this side of the coin
and not the
other?
That's the hardest part.
If I stayed three minutes
longer, if I checked
out the scene a little longer,
if I didn't
want liquor at the time, if I
didn't go, all
those, like, what-ifs are there.
NICK MILLER, The East Bay
Express: I have
been in buildings like that.
I have been at parties like
that.
And it just crushes you to think
about all
these young people that were in
there.
JOANNE JENNINGS: Nick Miller is
editor of
The East Bay Express, Oakland's
alternative
weekly.
NICK MILLER: We have discovered
that, on November
13, the Code Enforcement
Department had documented
numerous complaints, at least
10.
Apparently, the venue had been
operating for
two to three years as an illegal
underground
venue, which means it wasn't
permitted to
do live music, it wasn't
permitted have residential
or anything like that.
JOANNE JENNINGS: While safety
violations at
Ghost Ship were unusually
egregious, Miller
estimates there are dozens of
underground
art warehouses in Oakland.
NICK MILLER: More than hundreds,
potentially.
There's no proper plumbing.
There's no smoke alarm or
sprinkler system.
JOANNE JENNINGS: As the death
toll continues
to mount, the loss is felt
throughout Oakland's
vast, yet tight-knit artistic
community.
LARA EDGE, Industrial Art
Entrepreneur: As
soon as the fire happened, it
was obviously
a dialogue about who was there
and which members
of our community are accounted
for and not
accounted for, and immediately
thinking about
what can be done for the victims
and the victims'
families.
JOANNE JENNINGS: Lara Edge, an
industrial
art entrepreneur, works out of
American Steel
Studios.
The sprawling six-acre property
provides work
space for artists working on
anything from
large scale Burning Man-style
industrial art
to architecture.
Edge is concerned about a
possible backlash
against the city's many
warehouse collectives.
LARA EDGE: What's really needed
right now
is not blame, but a way to work
with city
officials and not risk losing
tenancy or being
evicted by wanting to come
forward and talk
about safety upgrades that need
to be made.
We're not living in spaces that
are dangerous
because we're negligent people.
It costs a lot of money to do
these upgrades.
And also raising the red flag
means a potential
for being booted.
JOANNE JENNINGS: Oakland's rapid
gentrification
has hit artists particularly
hard.
LARA EDGE: During the first
cycle of the tech
boom years ago, artists got
pushed out of
San Francisco into Oakland.
Now Oakland is increasingly
unaffordable.
JOANNE JENNINGS: The 200 people
who work out
of American Steel Studios were
faced with
the very real possibility of
eviction when
the property was put on the
market in 2014.
Last month, a new owner
purchased the compound,
and promised to preserve it for
artists, but
with one condition:
LARA EDGE: Safety upgrades had
to be made.
And they're primarily related to
fire.
So, this building has a steel
ceiling.
There were gates that didn't
have manned doors
or easy egresses.
And so all these changes had to
be made before
the new owners would buy the
building.
Given everything that happened
with the fire,
I'm thankful that we did that
and we do have
proper exits now.
JOANNE JENNINGS: Thankful that
this kind of
fire is unlikely to happen here.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Joanne Jennings
in Oakland, California.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Joanne Jennings
in Oakland, California.
This year has marked a rise in
partisan divides
the world over.
But former British Prime
Minister Tony Blair
is on a mission to spur citizens
across the
globe to move toward the middle.
I spoke with him earlier this
evening, and
began by asking about building
an agenda for
what he calls the center ground.
TONY BLAIR, Former British Prime
Minister:
What it means is, as you can see
from here
and from Europe at the moment,
from Britain,
there's a huge wave of
anti-establishment
feeling.
There's an enormous amount of
anger.
And it's collapsing governments
and political
movements across the world right
now.
And my view is that we're
entering into a
situation of enormous
instability, insecurity,
fragility.
And because I happen to believe
that the best
policy solutions lie in the
center ground,
then I want to see, how does the
center revitalize
itself?
How does it develop the policy
agenda for
the future?
And how do we link up people who
have the
same basic ideas and attachments
to the same
basic values across the world?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, are you
talking about creating
new political parties in the
middle?
TONY BLAIR: No.
It's really about linking up
people who look
at what is happening in the
world, know that
the world needs change, and not
the status
quo, don't want the center to be
a place where
we're just managing the status
quo, but instead
where we're really articulating
change and
developing a policy agenda
that's going to
allow us to address the concerns
of people
left behind by globalization
and, you know,
communities that are fragmented,
and allows
us also to address it in a way
which provides
answers, and not just anger.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, I mean, what
we see in
the United States is both
political parties
pretty fiercely jealously guard
their own
territory.
TONY BLAIR: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republicans
don't want
to give up any ground.
The Democrats don't want to give
up any ground.
Is there really room left for
something in
the middle?
TONY BLAIR: Well, there's a
necessity, I think,
because the trouble with today's
politics
-- and it's exactly the same on
the other
side of the Atlantic -- is that
people -- and
this is partly as a result, I
think, of social
media interacting with
conventional media.
And people divide into groups
where they talk
to each other, but don't talk
across the divide.
And yet most of the challenges
we face in
the world today are challenges
that are to
do with trade, with technology,
with how you
make sure that people are
properly educated,
reform your health care system.
These are challenges that we all
share in
common.
And they require practical
solutions.
I mean, they may be radical,
indeed, in many
circumstances, should be, but
they need to
be practical, evidence-based,
and capable
of not just exploiting people's
anger or riding
their anger, but saying, this is
something
that's going to improve your
life.
I mean, we have taken a
situation in the U.K.
because of concerns, for
example, over immigration
and other things, so Britain now
is on a path
out of Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
TONY BLAIR: I still hope we will
ultimately
change our mind about that.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You hope it will
be reversed?
TONY BLAIR: I think, as people
see what it
really means, and when we see
the alternative
offer on the table, then I think
people may
think again.
But I can't tell that at the
moment.
The likelihood at the moment is
we just proceed
with Brexit.
This is a huge decision that we
have taken
that's going to isolate us as a
country at
the very point in time when the
world is moving
closer together.
So, it's a -- this for me is a
-- I have always
been in that center ground -- in
my case,
on the center-left in politics.
But I think, right now, there is
an urgency
about it.
And you look, for example, at
what has just
happened in Italy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
TONY BLAIR: You see, in Austria,
OK, people
say, well, it's great because
the more moderate
person won.
I mean, someone with a --
frankly, a virtually
neo-Nazi battleground got almost
46 percent
of the vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
TONY BLAIR: So, this is serious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what we're
looking at in
Europe is a move away from what
was the traditional
center of politics to the right.
Why isn't that -- why isn't the
right ascendant
right now, or why don't you
believe the right
is ascendant?
TONY BLAIR: Well, it may be
ascendant in political
terms, but the question is
whether they have
got answers to the problems
people face.
Look, if you're living in a
community that's
become fragmented and left
behind, there's
not proper investment in it and
so on, in
the end, the answer is to make
sure that we
go and we help those
communities, we educate
the people properly, we build
the necessary
infrastructure of support for
people.
It's not, in the end, stopping a
process of
globalization that isn't
ultimately a policy
of governments.
It's driven by people, by
technology, by migration,
by the way the world's changed.
So, the risk we have is that we
close down
in the face of this.
And then, of course, as all the
history demonstrates,
you end up becoming
protectionist, isolationist.
You end up with even bigger
problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and I want
so ask you
about that, because, of course,
we have just
elected in the United States
Donald Trump,
who would argue, I think, that
he's somewhere
in the center.
He's not far right.
He's certainly not far left.
And I want to specifically ask
you, Tony Blair,
about his foreign policy moves.
He had a phone call the other
day with the
president of Taiwan, which is
raising all
kinds of questions about the
U.S. relationship
with China.
He has had phone calls with the
prime minister
of Pakistan, friendly phone
calls.
Do you have any observations to
make about
his early moves and what he said
about foreign
policy?
TONY BLAIR: No.
(LAUGHTER)
TONY BLAIR: And, I mean, the
reason for that
is, I think what -- in this
period of time,
I would virtually discount
everything.
Let's wait and see what actually
happens.
And I...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have
concerns, though?
I mean, he talked in the
campaign about whether
NATO is necessary anymore.
TONY BLAIR: Well, I think it's
really important
that we -- that NATO's got a
vital role to
play.
It's very important that we
protect NATO.
But I'm one of these people
that, once you
have had your election and you
have elected
your candidate, let's see what
actually happens.
There's no point, and there's
certainly not
for me as an outsider giving a
running commentary
on the president-elect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, as somebody
who's been
in the center, at the center of
policy-making
in the West, to have a president
coming in
who's already stirring this kind
of comment
and controversy...
TONY BLAIR: Stirring is OK.
It just depends what happens in
the end.
I mean, look, ultimately, this
will be decided
by what policies are adopted by
the new administration.
The president-elect, I don't --
has not chosen
yet his secretary of state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
TONY BLAIR: Actually, the choice
on defense
is...
JUDY WOODRUFF: General Mattis.
TONY BLAIR: Yes, most people
would have a
high regard for.
So, I'm -- for me, let's wait
and see what
actually happens.
And, in a sense, what is more
motivating to
me is not a result in a
particular case.
It's, what are these practical
solutions that
are going to allow us to develop
our countries
in the way that protects the
basic liberal
democratic values and are values
that are
dear to me and are the essence
of the success
of our countries, in my view?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tony Blair,
joining us to talk
about the center ground, and
waiting and seeing
on the president-elect, thank
you very much.
TONY BLAIR: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
Egypt's foreign
minister views the future Trump
administration;
what the halting of the Dakota
Access pipeline
means long-term; and a look
inside the nation's
largest art fair.
But, first, for more on the
president-elect's
call with the Taiwanese
president and the
latest from the transition, it's
time for
Politics Monday.
Joining us are Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report, Karen Tumulty of The
Washington Post,
and Geoff Dyer.
He's diplomatic correspondent
for The Financial
Times.
He has served as the paper's
Beijing bureau
chief, and he broke the story of
Mr. Trump's
call with the Taiwanese leader.
And we welcome all of you to the
program.
So, a little bit of news before
we talk about
this.
We have just seen on the wire
services that
Henry Kissinger, former
secretary of state,
in Beijing to meet with the
leadership there,
is saying that he's impressed by
the -- quote
-- "calm reaction" of the
Chinese leaders
to the Trump phone call with the
president
of Taiwan.
But, Amy Walter, why is this
causing such
a stir at this point?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: It's
causing such a stir because, as
we seem to
say every single Monday, Judy,
this is an
unconventional president doing
unconventional
things.
And this is not something that
the traditional
establishment would see as a
good idea to
do, especially when there's not
necessarily
a policy behind it.
And I think that Tony Blair
raised this issue,
too.
We don't really know what this
actually means.
The call in and of itself, as
Henry Kissinger
said, hasn't created some
tremendous trouble
in China.
But what we don't know is
whether this is
just posturing or whether this
is a policy
change.
And we have heard from the Trump
transition
both sides.
One side says, no, this is not.
The vice president, for example,
went on television.
Kellyanne Conway, who was his
campaign manager,
went on television, and they
said, this was
just a courtesy call.
There's no change in policy.
We're reading other accounts
today that suggest
that this is about a change in
policy, the
president-elect had been very
tough on China
during the campaign, we're going
to see a
more aggressive Trump
administration in dealing
with China.
But we don't have an answer for
that yet.
And that's why I think there is
all the consternation
going around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Geoff Dyer, how
much of this
was planned, and how much of it
is just happenstance
on the part of Mr. Trump?
GEOFF DYER, The Financial Times:
As was just
said, it's very hard to tell,
actually.
Mike Pence came out and said
this was a courtesy
call, which would seem that it
was just a
small gesture that they're
planning to do.
But then Donald Trump a few
hours later went
on Twitter, as is his wont, and
essentially
linked the call to Taiwan with a
whole series
of things he doesn't like about
Chinese economic
and foreign policies and implied
that the
U.S. views of the status of
Taiwan are now
up for negotiation, that he
wants them to
be part of a broader negotiation
with China
about a whole series of economic
and foreign
policy issues.
So, we just don't really know
what exactly
they're planing to do with this.
Was it just about Taiwan?
Is it just because they want to
push back
a bit on Taiwan?
Or do we see this as a way of
somehow to get
leverage for a whole series of
other issues
on the currency, on tariffs, on
the South
China Sea?
It's unclear.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
Karen Tumulty, read the tea
leaves a little
bit more.
What do you see?
KAREN TUMULTY, The Washington
Post: Well,
I think that Donald Trump, how
many times
during the campaign did he tell
us that his
plan for dealing with foreign
policy was to
be unpredictable?
Well, there we have it.
I think that, increasingly, the
evidence does
look like this wasn't just a
casual -- world
leaders don't just pick up the
phone and call
each other.
It does appear that this was a
deliberate
move, a deliberately provocative
move.
And it seems very much in line
with his rhetoric
during the campaign that he
intended to be
tough on China.
And don't forget, we have seen a
lot of presidential
candidates, memorably, Bill
Clinton, who used
to criticize George Herbert
Walker Bush for
coddling dictators and then take
the much
softer line with China once he's
in office.
I think Donald Trump is
signaling that that's
not going to be his way of doing
business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Amy Walter,
it plays into
the other phone calls that were
reported from
overseas, calls, for example,
with the prime
minister of Pakistan, where he
was apparently
overly complimentary, in the
words of one
observer who seemed to know
about it, and
the broadening search apparently
now for secretary
of state.
Is this all -- how are we to
understand what's
happening right now?
AMY WALTER: Well, the other
thing that the
vice president-elect said over
the weekend
is, look, you're going to know
about our policy
once we are in office, that
what's happening
right now in the transition
shouldn't be read
too deeply in to.
There are a lot of these calls
that we're
taking.
He's reaching out to a lot of
folks.
Look, if you watch the Trump cam
that is positioned
in the Trump Tower, watching
people go up
and down the escalator, you saw
one of those
in there today was Al Gore.
Right?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
Yes.
AMY WALTER: Lots of people
coming in and out,
not necessarily indicative of
what his policy
is going to be.
To have Al Gore one day, and the
next day
the head of ExxonMobil, what
does that -- what
are you supposed to read into
that about his
stance on climate change?
So, I think, again, it's going
to be that
the actions that he takes are
significant.
And I know we're going to get to
this in a
second.
But the people that he's putting
around him
on the Cabinet suggest that he's
putting together
a very conservative, almost
traditionally
conservative Republican group
around him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Geoff Dyer,
before we leave
foreign policy, how are the
folks in foreign
capitals reading all this, when
they see with
the call with the president of
Taiwan, when
they read about these other
conversations
and this ongoing secretary of
state search?
GEOFF DYER: Well, we had this
whole discussion
during the campaign and after
the election
about whether to take Trump
literally or seriously.
Well, in foreign countries, when
they see
what he's saying on Twitter
since the election
and seeing what he's saying in
these calls
with foreign leaders, they take
everything
very seriously and they take
everything very
literally.
So, foreign governments are
going to be poring
through all these tweets looking
for -- to
try and discern what it means
for foreign
policy.
So, if he thinks that just by
being unpredictable
that somehow he can have an
impact, but not
necessarily commit himself to
certain things,
that's not the way it is going
to be read
in foreign capitals.
They are going to take these
things very literally
and very directly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, one of --
and Amy just
mentioned this, Karen, but a
meeting today
with Al Gore, of all people, the
former vice
president, ran for president
unsuccessfully.
What are -- again, what are we
to think about
all of this?
KAREN TUMULTY: Well, other than
they may or
may not have discussed the
relative merits
of the Electoral College vs. the
popular vote,
what I am told by sources close
to Gore is
that this was at the instigation
of Ivanka
Trump, that she reached out to
the former
vice president recently to
discuss climate
change, and that he was really
impressed with
the way she was thinking about
the issue,
framing the issue.
He had to be in New York anyway.
And so he went -- the original
idea was that
this meeting was to be between
Al Gore and
Ivanka Trump.
And it turns out it is with the
president-elect.
And it was interesting, too,
that Al Gore
on his way out said, it was a
very thoughtful
discussion and that it will be
continued.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Donald Trump,
Amy, is meeting
with Democrats, as well as
Republicans.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's picked a
very clear Republican
in Ben Carson to run the Housing
Department.
But you alluded to this a moment
ago.
We are, frankly, kept on guard
right now -- caught
off-guard, I guess you could
say, by the variety
of people he's...
AMY WALTER: The variety of
people he's bringing
in.
But when you look at the people
that he's
actually put around him on his
Cabinet, this
is a pretty -- I would argue a
very conservative
Cabinet.
And whether it's on issues of
immigration,
his pick for the attorney
general, very conservative
on that issue.
On education, this is Betsy
DeVos, somebody
who has supported school
vouchers.
And even on Ben Carson, he's not
exactly steeped
in housing policy, but his
statements on the
issue have also been very
conservative.
And looking back on something he
wrote even
in 2015 talking about some
programs within
HUD, mandated social engineering
schemes,
very critical of some of the
issues that HUD
would try to put forward, he's
been critical
of other programs, government
programs.
And so this is a Cabinet right
now, especially
when you look at domestic social
policy or
domestic policy in general, this
is a very
conservative group of people
that he's put
around him, despite the fact
that he's bringing
all kinds of people into Trump
Tower.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
And just again on the -- I posed
the question
to you a minute ago, Geoff Dyer,
about the
array of people he's talking to
about secretary
of state, from Rudy Giuliani, to
today -- or,
yesterday, we learned about Rex
Tillerson,
who is the head of a big oil
company, ExxonMobil.
Again, if you're a foreign
government, are
you seeing this as a typical
process for choosing
somebody in that position?
GEOFF DYER: It's not so typical,
but it's
been done so publicly, and they
have to turn
up for these auditions at Trump
Tower.
But it's perfectly respectful
thing for him
to cast a wide net, to talk to a
lot of people.
And most of the people he's
thinking about
are very serious individuals.
They're perfectly credible
candidates.
The thing that strikes me, from
looking at
the names so far in the Cabinet
on the foreign
policy side, is the one thing
that unites
them -- and that's General
Mattis at the Pentagon,
Mike Pompeo at the CIA, even
Mitt Romney to
become secretary of state --
they're all very,
very hawkish on Iran.
That's the one thing that you
can say about
the new Cabinet Donald Trump is
putting together.
That seems to be one of the
coherent themes.
They're very, very skeptical
about Iran.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And quick,
finally, to Karen.
More names coming up for
secretary of state,
we think?
KAREN TUMULTY: Well, we have
heard today,
what, Jon Huntsman, the former
-- Barack Obama's
former ambassador to China, a
far more moderate
figure than -- at least
politically than we
have seen, although, again,
very, very much
in agreement with a lot of what
Donald Trump
has to say on China.
The other thing is that Trump
doesn't seem
to feel in a great hurry to make
this decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No, he doesn't.
KAREN TUMULTY: He seems to both
be enjoying
the drama, enjoying the
suspense, but also
willing to let this kind of play
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karen Tumulty,
Amy Walter,
Geoff Dyer, thank you all.
The first foreign leader to call
president-elect
Trump after his victory was
Egypt's president,
Abdel Fattah El-Sisi.
The Arab world's most populous
nation has
had turbulent relations with the
Obama White
House since the 2011 revolution,
and the subsequent
2013 coup that first brought
El-Sisi to power.
Egypt's foreign minister, Sameh
Shoukry, has
been in Washington meeting with
Secretary
of State Kerry and with key
leaders on Capitol
Hill, and last week with vice
president-elect
Mike Pence.
This morning, he sat down with
our chief foreign
affairs correspondent, Margaret
Warner.
MARGARET WARNER: Minister
Shoukry, thank you
so much for having us.
President-elect Trump and your
President Sisi
have had some very glowing words
to say about
one another.
Your own embassy just put out a
statement
that, in fact, you are looking
forward to
better ties with the new
administration.
So, are you looking forward to
turning the
page on this U.S.-Egypt
relationship, which
has had its ups and downs over
the last few
years?
SAMEH SHOUKRY, Egyptian Foreign
Minister:
We're certainly looking forward
for consolidating
and strengthening the
U.S.-Egyptian relationship.
It is always our objective to
have close ties
with the United States.
We're at a transitional period
of our history
and we're on a road to reform.
MARGARET WARNER: How do you
expect the Trump
administration to be different
than the Obama
administration when it comes to
dealing with
Egypt?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: Well, we look
forward, from
what we heard from
president-elect Trump,
a clear vision related to the
conditions and
the challenges in the Middle
East.
And there's a great deal of
parallelity in
that vision related to how we
can eradicate
terrorism, how we can regain
stability in
the region.
MARGARET WARNER: So, are you
expecting more
cooperation on fighting
terrorism or making
that the priority, and less
attention, for
example, to the issue of human
rights in Egypt?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: That's not the
issue that concerns
us.
I think the issue that concerns
us is certainly
regaining stability, but issues
of human rights
are an integral part of our
reform policies,
of our new constitution.
MARGARET WARNER: Did either Mr.
Trump or Mr.
Pence, when you met with vice
president-elect
Pence, on their own raise the
issue of human
rights with you?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: On the occasion
of my meeting,
it was to convey a message from
President
Sisi.
And there was a general
discussion related
to conditions in the region and
the importance
of the strategic relationship
that binds the
United States and Egypt.
MARGARET WARNER: But what about
human rights?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: It wasn't raised
specifically.
MARGARET WARNER: It wasn't
raised specifically?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: No.
MARGARET WARNER: There is one
case that is
getting some attention here.
And that's of a young woman
named Aya Hijazi,
who came to work with her
husband in a sort
of center for street kids.
And then she's been arrested and
held for
months and months on what
everyone here says
is bogus charges that they were
abusing the
children.
What is the status of that case?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: Well, I think
it's a very serious
accusation that's been made.
And I think anyone would be
interested to
get to the bottom of accusations
related to
minors and related to abuse.
So, I would challenge the issue
of bogus accusations.
And I think it's important to
recognize the
impartiality of the Egyptian
judicial system.
MARGARET WARNER: So, let me ask
you a couple
of other things about human
rights.
Your Parliament last week just
passed another
law, further restrictions on the
rights or
the activities of NGOs.
Will President Sisi sign that?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: The elected
officials decided
that they had their own vision
of what they
considered in the best interests
of the public.
And this was just before I left,
so I don't
have any information related to
what the president's
position on it is.
MARGARET WARNER: As you know,
human rights
are a deep concern here in the
United States
in terms of what's going on in
Egypt.
And it is hard for people to
understand why
so many dissidents, journalists,
activists,
nonviolent people, NGOs, have
been rounded
up, are being detained, are
having their rights
restricted, why, for people who
speak out,
for people who want to
demonstrate.
SAMEH SHOUKRY: My -- exactly.
It's not a matter of people
speaking out.
There's nobody who's been
accused of anything
related to freedom of expression
or undertaking
activities of civic
responsibility.
All those who have been
subjected to a judicial
inquiry and trials have been
accused of criminal
activity, criminal activity,
whether it's
in demonstrating without
necessary permits,
in violent activity during
demonstrations,
and such issues that are
penalized in the
criminal code.
MARGARET WARNER: Let me turn now
to Syria.
Initially -- and, of course, it
was a different
government.
The government of Egypt opposed
President
Bashar al-Assad.
But there are signs now that, in
fact, the
Egyptian government is growing
closer to him,
more supportive.
President Sisi said he thought
the Assad army
was perhaps best equipped to
fight terrorism.
You have been also voting with
Russia in the
Security Council on resolutions
related to
Syria.
If the Syrian government asked
Egypt to also
send forces of any kinds, and
there have been
rumors to this effect, would
Egypt send some
to help him?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: Categorically
not.
Let me clarify that the
president, when he
made his statements, wasn't
referring to Syria
in particular.
He was referring to the fact
that we consider
that it is the national armies
of the nation
state which are responsible to
fight terrorism.
That is their primary
responsibility.
They have the better ability,
rather than
relying on any form of foreign
intervention
in this regard.
So, we believe that a political
solution should
be under way, and that which is
necessarily
inclusive of all political
factions in Syria.
So, there is no commitment
towards any specific
political entity in Syria.
There hasn't been any reference
to the current
Syrian government.
MARGARET WARNER: So, would you
say your position
is closer to that of the United
States or
-- right now -- or to Russia?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: We have been
cooperating with
both the United States and
Russia, have been
actively supporting a greater
understanding
between them because of their
ability to impact
the situation.
We believe that it is
intolerable that the
current level of violence and --
that we continue
after five years of a
half-a-million loss
of life, that we -- that this
situation should
continue.
MARGARET WARNER: Let me end with
asking you
about a couple of campaign
promises.
President-elect Trump said he
was going to
push to renegotiate this entire
Iran nuclear
deal.
Do you think that's a good idea?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: The issue is very
important.
And we must guarantee that the
region remains
free of nuclear weapons.
MARGARET WARNER: And so do you
think the Iran
nuclear deal furthers that aim?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: We believe that
the deal can
-- has room for improvement,
definitely, in
terms of the time and in terms
of the guarantees
to prevent any proliferation of
nuclear weapons.
MARGARET WARNER: And then,
finally, he promised
to move the U.S. Embassy -- this
is an old
issue -- from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem.
Would that be high on your list?
SAMEH SHOUKRY: No.
We have always opposed any
movement in that
direction as contravening
international law
and legitimacy.
MARGARET WARNER: Thank you very
much, sir.
SAMEH SHOUKRY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Protesters won a
big 11th-hour
victory from the Obama
administration yesterday
that prevents the completion of
the Dakota
Access pipeline.
But is it just a temporary delay
until president-elect
Trump takes office?
The nearly 1,200-mile pipeline
was almost
complete before this weekend's
announcement.
One of the last stretches is a
single-mile
segment that goes under the
Missouri River.
The battle has been raging for
seven months
now.
And to Hari Sreenivasan for our
update.
MAN: The Corps of Engineers is
going to deny
the easement.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thousands of
protesters
celebrated the announcement late
yesterday.
On Sunday, the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
said it wouldn't grant the final
easement
to allow the pipeline to be
drilled.
Instead, the Corps said it would
begin exploring
alternative routes.
The Standing Rock Sioux tribe
and others say
the pipeline will destroy sacred
lands and
are worried an oil leak could
threaten the
tribe's water supply.
North Dakota's governor, the
company and members
of the state's congressional
delegation all
denounced the decision.
William Brangham has been
covering the story
for months, and is with us again
tonight.
William, this doesn't seem to be
over.
I don't see the protesters
breaking camp.
I don't see anybody jumping for
joy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: No.
There was some joy certainly
yesterday, and
I think, obviously, some
spillover into today,
because, for many people, this
was considered
an enormous victory.
This is what the Standing Rock
tribe and all
of its thousands of supporters
have wanted
for months, which was to stop
the pipeline
going under the Missouri River
right next
to the tribe.
Now, whether this is over or not
is still
an issue.
The Army Corps didn't cancel the
pipeline.
They didn't say it's definitely
not going
here.
They said, let's take a longer
review, let's
talk to the tribes some more,
and let's consider
some alternate routes.
So, it's still not clear if this
is, in fact,
the done deal.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the
alternate route
idea doesn't sit well with the
local authorities
and the company.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: No.
The company has, from the very
beginning,
been steadfast that they will
not move this
pipeline.
The governor of North Dakota has
said the
pipeline is not going to be
moved.
Now, the Army Corps of Engineers
could and
has in the past looked at other
routes.
There's multiple ways to cross
the Missouri
River here.
But right now, the Army Corps of
Engineers
says all options are open and
they're going
back to the drawing board, in
essence.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what
happens to the
protesters in the coldest part
of winter heading
into this area now?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, that's
still an open
question.
We don't know yet.
The head of the Standing Rock
Sioux, the chairman,
David Archambault Ii, he, in
essence, declared
this as a victory, and he said,
people, you
can go home now, things are
safe.
I think, in the back of their
minds, they
know that, just as the Obama
administration
made this happen, a Trump
administration might
try to reverse course.
So, I think everyone is
recognizing subzero
temperatures.
This is a very, very hard place
to live out
in the open on the prairies of
North Dakota.
It's freezing.
So, everyone, go home, rest,
that's what the
chairman seems to be saying.
And if we need to call on you
again, we will
do so.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there any
indication
that the policy change after the
inauguration
of Donald Trump?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well,
certainly.
That's -- this was, in essence,
driven in
large part by pressure brought
to bear on
the Obama administration and
them asking the
Army Corps to take a second look
at this.
So, what the Obama
administration has done,
the Trump administration could
undo.
And Trump has been very clear
from the get-go
he wants this pipeline to be
built.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that tribe
has had a,
well, complicated relationship
with the Army
Corps, this particular decision
that they
support, but, in the past,
there's a lot of
decisions that they have not.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
correct.
I mean, there have been a lot of
instances
where the tribe has said, we
have not been
consulted on these types of
events in the
past.
In fact, one of the biggest
critics of this
is a Congressman Kevin Cramer
from North Dakota.
He points out, good luck on
trying to do any
infrastructure projects in the
U.S. going
forward, if you can simply
overturn it like
this.
But he says, on this very same
land, natural
gas pipelines have been put
through, electric
high-tension power lines have
gone through.
And the tribe wasn't happy about
that, but
they said that they had no power
to do anything
about it, whereas, with this
pipeline, they
did.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just recently,
there was
audio of the conversations that
took place
and where the tribe was
considering this,
because one of the contentions
that the tribe
had is that: We were not part of
this process.
Right?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right.
The audio that you're referring
to is an instance
of several years ago, where the
tribe made
very clear that they didn't want
this pipeline
coming anywhere near them.
The problem with that is that,
in subsequent
meetings, the Army Corps has
been saying:
We have asked for the tribe to
continue to
offer further input.
And they argue that they simply
didn't respond
and that they didn't come to
subsequent meetings.
But I think it's been quite
clear the tribe
has been against this from the
get-go.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
William Brangham,
thanks so much.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thanks, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
It's North
America's biggest art fair, with
big money
at stake, but who is it for and
how does it
work?
Jeffrey Brown visited Miami
Beach to find
out what Art Basel is all about,
which just
wrapped up this weekend.
JEFFREY BROWN: A family reunion
for the international
art tribe, a trade show, but one
that includes
some up-to-the-moment political
commentary,
Art Basel Miami Beach is all of
that and more,
art of all shapes and sizes and
colors and
kinds, and all for sale.
It can be head-spinning, or, if
you're a prominent
gallery owner like Jack
Shainman, nightmare-inducing:
JACK SHAINMAN, Jack Shainman
Gallery: A lot
happens the first days or the
first few hours.
In fact, one of my anxiety
dreams that I have
when I travel is that all these
collectors
show up at my booth at the same
time at an
art fair, and I can't talk to
all of them
at once.
JEFFREY BROWN: Here at the Miami
Beach Convention
Center, 269 high-end galleries
from 29 countries
around the world take part in
the main art
fair, last year attracting
95,000 viewers
and collectors over six days.
Fred Bidwell was back this year.
FRED BIDWELL, Art Collector:
This is crazy.
This is more art than the human
mind could
possibly perceive.
JEFFREY BROWN: With billions of
dollars on
the line, including new money
from abroad,
New York gallery owners James
and Jane Cohan
have a lot at stake.
JANE COHAN, James Cohan Gallery:
We really
know the kinds of things our
clients are looking
for.
So, when we have something
that's spectacular,
they have been interested in a
certain artist,
we have a spectacular work,
we're going to
let them know that we're
bringing it to the
fair, and then they can come and
see it.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, a little bit
of this is
sort of precooked?
JANE COHAN: Absolutely.
But I still really believe that
you have to
see a work of art in person to
fall in love.
JEFFREY BROWN: Collectors come
in all forms,
trophy hunters, speculators, and
actual lovers
of art.
This fair, an offshoot of one in
Basel, Switzerland,
is known for attracting Latin
American art
and collectors, including Tiqui
Atencio, who's
just written a book about
collecting art.
TIQUI ATENCIO, Art Collector: I
walked into
a gallery that I love, which is
the Brazilian
gallery from Sao Paulo, Fontes
de Deloya (ph).
And I started looking around,
and I saw these
two wonderful Latin American
artists from
Brazil in their 20s.
And I thought, oh, my God, these
are fantastic
artists.
JEFFREY BROWN: And did you buy?
TIQUI ATENCIO: I'm thinking of
it.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Fifteen years in,
Art Basel
Miami has spawned more than 20
additional
local fairs, catering to
different styles
and wallets, including one
titled Untitled.
WOMAN: There's a lot to see,
yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: With so much to
see, art advisers
have become big players here and
elsewhere
in the art world, counseling
individual, corporate
and institutional clients.
Kerri Hurtado is an adviser with
San Francisco's
Artsouce.
At Untitled, she showed works to
Jaya Kader,
a Miami-based architect who
designs homes
with contemporary art in mind.
JAYA KADER, Architect: You get
exposed to
so much.
There's no way that -- it would
take you a
whole year to get to see as much
as you get
to see in a few days in Miami.
And I like to work with Artsouce
because the
art world is so vast.
JEFFREY BROWN: Art everywhere,
but also other
kinds of excess.
Art journalist Janelle Zara.
JANELLE ZARA, Journalist:
Because we're in
Miami, things sometimes get a
little out of
hand.
There's a lot of showiness, you
know?
Everyone in the world is here.
And so that involves a lot of
fancy cars,
a lot of dressing up, you know,
a lot of hopping
from party to party.
And, increasingly, people who
are not in the
art world want to participate.
JEFFREY BROWN: But even in what
Zara described
as a subdued year, possibly
owing to the Zika
scare, the spectacle went on, a
psychedelic
electronic dance party in
Collins Park, complete
with a robot bouncer, droning
guitars played
by women standing on amplifiers,
and burgers
grilled under the hood of a
limousine.
There were the behind-the-scenes
dinners and
parties galore.
Also on display, the rise of
homegrown museums
and collectors like the Rubell
family, who
during the Art Basel fair, held
an opening
in their own enormous private
collection space.
You're market makers in a sense,
right?
If you choose an artist, you
have the power
to make people.
MERA RUBELL, Rubell Family
Collection: I know
people say that all the time,
that we make
markets and stuff like -- but I
can tell you
that that's not the way we live
our life.
We don't wake up in the morning
and say, oh,
we make markets.
This is really like the outside
world.
The inside world is very, very
basic.
It's a family that is constantly
talking about
the art.
We have the privilege to curate
it and hang
it.
The market is not so interesting
to us.
JEFFREY BROWN: The growth of art
fairs has
given more buyers access to the
art world,
less power to auction houses.
But there's a strict hierarchy
here, several
tiers of VIPs who get in first,
ahead of the
general public.
Most of the work here is
actually sold before
the fair even opens to the
public.
Clare McAndrew is a cultural
economist who
studies the art market.
CLARE MCANDREW, Cultural
Economist: The high
end has done extremely well.
I mean, I looked at auction
sales, for example,
and the segment over a million
has grown about
400 percent over the last 10
years.
If you look at the segment over
$10 million,
it's grown at over 1000 percent.
And if you look at the lower-end
segments,
they have grown very slowly.
In terms of sales growth, it's a
very top-heavy
marketplace.
JEFFREY BROWN: But that sort of
fits with
the whole inequality discussion
we have politically.
CLARE MCANDREW: It's exactly
paralleling what's
happening in the wider economy
and in wealth
distribution.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, as with
other markets,
those with the best information
gain advantage.
Josh Baer is an art adviser who
writes the
industry newsletter "Baer Faxt."
JOSH BAER, "Baer Faxt": Having
more information
about who's doing the show at
the Tate or
who's going to be in the Whitney
Biennial
or whose work is sold out and
who's buying
it or what's going on gives you
momentum information.
JEFFREY BROWN: Momentum, which
you can take
to clients or others and say...
JOSH BAER: Time to buy now
because next year
it's going to be twice as much
and there's
going to be something else going
on.
Art fairs are like auctions.
They're about forced urgency.
They're about the illusion of
you better decide
in the next 20 seconds, because
some billionaire
from China is coming in two
minutes and he
may take what you want.
JEFFREY BROWN: Amid all the
buying and selling,
what's an up-and-coming artist
to do, especially
one like Hank Willis Thomas, who
works in
many different media, often
tackling difficult
political issues of the moment?
He says artists need to imagine
a better future
for society, even if part of the
present deal
here is lucrative.
HANK WILLIS THOMAS, Artist: So,
there's no
way to get out of this system.
What I'm really most interested
in is how
we can use the system to improve
it.
And it's always a positive
improvement.
I don't want to alienate myself
from anyone.
JEFFREY BROWN: A bit more
politics and smaller
crowds this year.
But sales, the true bottom line,
were said
to be holding steady.
From Miami Beach, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: My favorite was
the hamburgers
grilled under the hood of the
car.
And you can read about another
artist, Mozart,
online, where medical historian
Howard Markel
examines the possible causes of
the great
composer's death 225 years ago
today.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.